European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Reciprocity and economics:
The economic implications of
Homo Reciprocans
Ernst Fehr*, Simon Ga¨ chter
University of Zurich, Institute for Empirical Economic Research, Blu(mlisalpstrasse 10, CH-8006 Zurich,
Switzerland
Abstract
A large number of studies suggest that reciprocity constitutes a basic motivational
drive. This paper shows that reciprocity can account for a wide range of empirical
phenomena: It (1) is a powerful eﬀort elicitation device, (2) explains why employers refuse
to hire underbidders and, hence, why wages are downwardly rigid, (3) gives rise to
non-compensating wage diﬀerentials and to a positive correlation between profits and
wages, (4) provides a rationale for the absence of explicit financial incentives, and (5) is
a key force that sustains social norms. 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
JEL classification: C92; D64; J30; J50; J64
Keywords: Reciprocity; Fairness; Involuntary unemployment; Wage rigidity; Wage diﬀerentials;
Social norms; Norm enforcement
1. Homo Reciprocans exists
There can be little doubt that selfish people exist and that material payoﬀs are
powerful motivators. However, a large number of studies shows that many
people are also driven by reciprocity. Positive reciprocity is the impulse or the
desire to be kind to those who have been kind to us. The principle ‘an eye for an
eye, a tooth for a tooth’ is the prototypical example of negative reciprocity. It is
*Corresponding author: Tel.: #41 1 6343709; fax: #41 1 6344907; e-mail: efehr@iew.unizh.ch;
gaechter@iew.unizh.ch; internet: http://www.unizh.ch/iew/grp/fehr/index.html.
This paper is part of a research project on the impact of social norms on wage formation. It is
financed by the Swiss National Science Foundation under the project no. 12-43590.95.
0014-2921/98/$19.00 Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII S 0 0 1 4 - 2 9 2 1 ( 9 7 ) 0 0 1 3 1 - 1
846 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
based on the impulse or the desire to strike back. Many people, and some
non-human animals too, show clear patterns of reciprocal behavior. De Waal
(1991), for example, reports that food sharing is a very common phenomenon
among chimpanzees. However, chimpanzees do not share food regardless of
past interactions. Sharing of individual A with B is highly positively correlated
with sharing of B with A. Moreover, if A requests food from B, B is significantly
more likely to respond to this request with aggression if A did not share with
B in the past. That the close neighbours of our evolutionary ancestors behave
reciprocally suggests that this behavior has deep evolutionary roots.
There is also strong evidence that many human subjects respond kindly to
‘gifts’ and retaliate if they have been hurt. Such reciprocation occurs even in
one-shot encounters among strangers and when it is costly for the responder.
Since the work of Gu ¨ th et al. (1982), negative reciprocity has been reported in
dozens if not hundreds of so-called ultimatum bargaining games.
 In these games
many subjects are willing to reject positive, yet uneven oﬀers although the
rejection is costly for them. This induces the other bargaining party to make
oﬀers that are closer to the equal split (see Gu ¨ th (1995b), Camerer and Thaler
(1995) and Roth (1995) for surveys of experimental results). Beginning with Fehr
et al. (1993), positive reciprocity has been documented in many so-called trust-
or gift-exchange games. In a gift exchange game a player A can voluntarily
transfer resources to player B. A transfer from A represents a ‘gift’ because
player B has no obligation to pay for the transfer. After observing A’s choice
B also can transfer resources to A. In case of reciprocal transfers both players are
in general better oﬀ. However, selfishness dictates that nobody makes a transfer.
The evidence clearly refutes this prediction: The vast majority of player A’s
makes positive transfers and many but not all player B’s reward this by making
a transfer as well.
The evidence from ultimatum-, trust-, and gift-exchange games suggests that
a large fraction of the people has a willingness to pay for rewarding kind and
punishing hostile acts. Since in most experiments subjects interacted
anonymously with each other reciprocity even applies if people do not know
with whom they interact. Moreover, reciprocity has also been documented if
it is common knowledge that nobody can observe individual choices. In the
experiments of Berg et al. (1995), Bolton and Zwick (1995) and Abbink et al.
(1997) the experimenter could not observe individual but only aggregate choices.
For evolutionary explanations of reciprocal preferences see, e.g., Gu ¨ th (1995a) and Huck and
Oechssler (1996).
In the ultimatum game a proposer and a responder can agree on the division of a fixed amount
of money. The proposer oﬀers a share x to the responder who can accept or reject. If she accepts she
receives x while the proposer receives 1!x. In case of rejection both receive zero. The standard
model with selfish preferences predicts an oﬀer x" , where is the smallest money unit, e.g.,
1 penny. The responder is predicted to accept any x'0.
See also Berg et al. (1995), Jacobsen and Sadrieh (1996), Abbink et al. (1997).
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 847
The impact of reciprocity has also been observed under high-stakes conditions.
Cameron (1995) conducted a one-shot ultimatum game in Indonesia in which
the bargaining pie amounted to the income of three months. She observed the
same behavioral pattern in these high-stake games compared to games with
much lower stakes. Fehr and Tougareva (1995) conducted gift exchange games
in Russia in which subjects earned on average three month’s income in a two-
hour session. In a control session the earnings opportunity decreased by a factor
of ten. They could not detect any eﬀect of the stake level on the frequency or
strength of reciprocal responses. The existence of reciprocal choices also seems
to be robust with regard to the introduction of one-shot repetitions. If subjects
have the opportunity to learn by playing a series of identical games against
diﬀerent opponents behavior remains rather stable over time. In particular, the
frequency and strength of reciprocal responses does not decline over time (Roth
et al., 1991; Fehr et al., 1994, Charness, 1996; Ga ¨ chter and Falk, 1997).
Reciprocal behavior may be interpreted in terms of a desire to be kind or
hostile in response to kind or hostile acts. Alternatively, it may be interpreted in
terms of evolutionarily driven, low rationality stimulus—response behavior (e.g.,
Gale et al., 1995). We doubt this interpretation because ultimatum and gift
exchange games are so simple that it is diﬃcult to believe that people are unable
to behave according to their true preferences in these games. However, from an
economic viewpoint the issue of interpretation becomes less important as long
as one recognizes the stability of reciprocal behavior. The important fact is that
reciprocal behavior emerges under well-defined conditions and gives rise to
economically relevant phenomena.
2. Homo Oeconomicus also exists
The number of subjects who behave reciprocally in one-shot situations is
relatively high. In Berg et al. (1995), Ga ¨ chter and Falk (1997), Miller (1997), Fehr
et al. (1994), Fehr and Falk (1996), Abbink et al. (1997) the fraction of subjects
exhibiting reciprocal choices is never below 40% and sometimes above 60%.
However, there is also a non-negligible fraction of subjects who does not
reciprocate and behaves completely selfish. In the previously cited studies
between 20% and 30% of the subjects behaved in this way. Thus, a non-trivial
minority of subjects exhibits selfish behavior.! The coexistence of reciprocal and
selfish types raises exciting and important questions: How do selfish and
In a longer version of this paper we have dealt in more detail with this problem. The
larger version of this paper can be found on our homepage (http://www.unizh.ch/iew/grp/fehr/
workingpapers.html).
!Not all subjects can be classified as being either reciprocal of selfish. Yet, the vast majority of
subjects seems to fall into these two categories.
848 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
reciprocal types interact? When do the reciprocal types shape the aggregate
outcome and when the selfish types? Which features of the institutional environ-
ment enable the dominance of one of the types? What are the welfare conse-
quences of institutions in the presence of heterogeneous types?
At the theoretical level only little research exists to answer the above ques-
tions." At the empirical (experimental) level the situation is somewhat better. In
the following sections we will provide several examples indicating that the
presence of reciprocal types can generate aggregate outcomes which diﬀer
radically from the standard prediction. As we will see the power of reciprocity to
shape aggregate outcomes does not only derive from the mere fact that many
reciprocal subjects exist. It is also due to the fact that the existence of reciprocal
types changes the behavior of the selfish types. In particular, the existence of
positive reciprocity may induce selfish types to behave ‘nicely’ for purely selfish
reasons because they can expect a reward from the reciprocal types. Likewise,
the existence of negative reciprocity may prevent opportunistic behavior of
selfish subjects because they are afraid of being punished by the selfish types.
However, we will also see an example in which the selfish types cause the
reciprocal types to behave purely selfish. Thus, the influence of one type on the
behavior of the other is no ‘one-way street’. Ultimately, the institutional envi-
ronment is decisive, too.
3. Reciprocity as an eﬀort elicitation device
In contemporary labor markets employment relations are to a large extent
regulated by incomplete contracts. The employers agree that— within limits that
are rarely completely described and only partly understood— they will obey the
orders of the employer while the employer agrees to pay the employees. The
obligations of both employer and employee are left unspecified in many states of
the world.#
In practise incomplete labor contracts often take the form of a fixed wage
contract without explicit performance incentives and a considerable degree of
worker discretion over the work eﬀort. The absence of explicit performance
incentives can be viewed as a rational response of employers to the diﬃculties of
measuring and verifying a worker’s performance in a multitask environment
(Holmstro ¨ m and Milgrom, 1991; Baker, 1992). Under conditions of incomplete-
ly specified obligations and only weak or no explicit performance incentives
a worker’s general job attitute, or what Williamson (1985) called ‘consummate
"For attempts in this direction see Fehr and Schmidt (1997) and Kolm (1994).
#This incompleteness has been stressed, for example, by Williamson (1985) and more recently by
Milgrom and Roberts (1992) and Hart (1995).
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 849
cooperation’ becomes important. Williamson defines ‘consummate cooperation’
as opposed to merely ‘perfunctory cooperation’ as ‘an aﬃrmative job attitude
whereby gaps are filled, initiative is taken, and judgment is exercised in an
instrumental way’. It is clear that under a complete labor contract a generally
cooperative job attitude would be superfluous because all relevant actions
would be unambiguously described and enforceable. However, how should one
describe, assess, and enforce ‘initiative’, ‘good judgment’ and ‘potentially arising
gaps’ unambiguously in an explicit contract?
In our view it is the requirement of a generally cooperative job attitude that
renders reciprocal motivations potentially very important in the labor process.
If a substantial fraction of the work force is motivated by reciprocity consider-
ations employers can vary the degree of ‘cooperativeness’ of workers by varying
the generosity of the compensation package. Therefore, variations in the base
wage that are unrelated to variations in performance incentives may nonetheless
have a large impact on eﬀort behavior.
In several papers the conjecture of reciprocal eﬀort choices has been investi-
gated in tightly controlled laboratory experiments (e.g., Fehr et al., 1993;
Charness, 1996; Ga¨ chter and Falk, 1997; Fehr and Ga¨ chter, 1997; Fehr et al.,
1997).$ In the latter two studies experimental employers could oﬀer a wage
contract that stipulated a wage w and a desired eﬀort level e . If an experimental
worker accepted (w, e ) she was free to choose any e in the interval
[e, e]"[0.1, 1], where e is the minimum and e is the maximum eﬀort level.
Since eﬀort costs where increasing in e any e 'e represents a non-enforceable
desire, that is, merely cheap talk. However, in the presence of reciprocal motiva-
tions employers may well be able to induce workers’ voluntary cooperation, i.e.,
e'e, by being suﬃciently generous.
The black bars in Fig. 1 show workers’ average eﬀort as a function of the rent
oﬀered to the workers. If all workers are fully selfish eﬀort levels should not
exceed e"0.1. However, as Fig. 1 shows, average eﬀort levels are strongly
increasing in the rent oﬀered and far above the selfish level. This suggests that on
average people are willing to put forward extra eﬀort above what is implied by
purely pecuniary considerations. In a large interview study conducted by Be-
wley (1995, 1997) field evidence supporting this view is provided. The inter-
viewed managers stress ‘that workers have so many opportunities to take
advantage of employers that it is not wise to depend on coercion and financial
incentives alone as motivators.2 Employers believe that other motivators are
necessary, which are best thought of as having to do with generosity’ (Bewley,
1995, p. 252).
$In all these studies anonymous strangers interacted with each other and individual reputation
formation was ruled out by the experimental design.
Any contract oﬀer (w, e ) implies a particular rent. The rent is defined as the worker’s income
that is implied by (w, e ) minus the (constant) opportunity costs of accepting the oﬀer.
850 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Fig. 1. Eﬀort—rent relation in the absence and presence of explicit performance incentives. Source:
Fehr and Ga ¨ chter (1997) and Fehr et al. (1997).
4. Reciprocity versus performance incentives
In the presence of a reciprocity-based cooperative job attitude of employees
the question arises how performance incentives aﬀect worker’s willingness to
cooperate. One possibility is that reciprocity gives rise to extra eﬀort on top of
what is enforced by financial incentives alone. However, it may also be the case
that explicit performance incentives reduce the willingness to voluntarily co-
operate. This possibility may arise because explicit performance incentives may
cause an atmosphere of threat and distrust. It seems quite conceivable that
reciprocity-based extra-eﬀort is reduced in a hostile work environment. Bewley
(1995), for example, reports that many managers stress that explicit ‘punishment
should be rarely used as a way to obtain cooperation’ (p. 252).
In the experiments conducted by Fehr and Ga ¨ chter (1997) and Fehr et al.
(1997) the impact of performance incentives on reciprocity-based voluntary
cooperation was examined. In addition to (w, e ) firms in one treatment had the
opportunity to stipulate a fine f that the worker had to pay in case of verified
shirking. The fine was constrained to be below f  and at the maximum fine
f  the incentive compatible eﬀort level of a selfish and risk neutral worker was
given by e*"0.2. The white bars in Fig. 1 show the eﬀort—rent relation in the
presence of this explicit performance incentive. As one can see the average eﬀort
is lower at each rent level. Hence, the joint gains from trade are lower, too. This
suggests that reciprocity-based incentives and explicit performance incentives
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 851
may indeed be in conflict with each other. In particular, explicit incentives may
destroy trust- and reciprocity-based incentives and, hence, may lead to welfare
losses. Therefore, the presence of reciprocal motives may provide a reason for
the absence of explicit incentives.
5. Rent-sharing and competition
If eﬀort levels depend positively on the rents oﬀered to the workers it may be
profitable for employers to pay rents (Akerlof, 1982; Akerlof and Yellen, 1988).
As a consequence, employers may be reluctant to cut wages in a recession as
reported by, for example, Bewley (1995, 1997) and Blinder and Choi (1990), for
wage cuts may decrease productivity. In addition, one would expect that more
profitable firms pay, ceteris paribus, on average, higher wages. Higher profitabil-
ity is likely to be associated with a higher marginal product of eﬀort. Therefore,
the return of a given eﬀort increase is higher and employers have an incentive to
pay higher rents (wages).
There are now several papers which confirm that the presence of reciprocal
types gives rise to downward wage rigidity (Fehr et al., 1993, 1994; Fehr and
Falk, 1996). In the following we draw on the Fehr—Falk paper because they
confirmed the existence of downward wage rigidity in the most competitive
environment— the competitive double auction. In this environment both experi-
mental firms and experimental workers are unconstrained in their wage setting
behavior. In particular, workers have the opportunity to underbid the prevailing
wage level.
Fehr and Falk implemented two treatment conditions— one with incomplete
labor contracts and endogenous eﬀort choices by the workers, and one condi-
tion in which the labor contract was complete because the experimenter enfor-
ced an exogenously given eﬀort level. In both conditions there was a large excess
supply of labor so that the standard model predicts a competitive wage level of
20. Fig. 2a shows the evolution of the wage level over time in a market with
incomplete contracts while Fig. 2b shows wages in a market with complete
contracts.
In addition, both figures show worker’s wage bids. As one can see wage levels
are radically diﬀerent in the two conditions. In the market with complete
contracts employers take full advantage of the low wage oﬀers made by the
workers and, as a consequence, wages are close to the competitive level in this
There exists a large psychological literature on the crowding out of intrinsic motivation by
explicit incentives (e.g., Deci and Ryan, 1985). In the psychological experiments the motivation that
is crowded out by explicit incentives is intrinsic to the task performed. In our experiment no such
intrinsic motivation was possible. It is, therefore, better to speak of a crowding out of trust- and
reciprocity. For an application of intrinsic motivation theory to economics see Frey (1997).
852 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Fig. 2. (a) Workers’ oﬀers and mean contract wages in the market with incomplete contracts.
Source: Fehr and Falk (1996). (b) Workers’ oﬀers and mean contract wages in the market with
complete contracts. Source: Fehr and Falk (1996).
market. In contrast, in the market with incomplete contracts employers are very
reluctant to accept worker’s underbidding of prevailing wages. From period
4 onwards wages even move further away from the competitive level. The data
analysis conducted in Fehr and Falk (1996) shows that employers’ high-wage
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 853
policy in the market with incomplete contracts was quite rational because in this
way they could sustain higher eﬀort levels and increase profits relative to
a low-wage policy.
The Fehr—Falk evidence indicates that the presence of reciprocal types
generates non-competitive wage levels despite fierce competition among
workers for scarce jobs. By comparing these results with a result reported in
Fehr et al. (1994) an even more striking conclusion can be made. Fehr et al.
(1994) had the same design as Fehr and Falk, except that in one treatment
condition there was no competition among workers or firms. Surprisingly, it
turns out that wage levels in the bilateral trading institution of Fehr et al. (1994)
are indistinguishable from wage levels in the competitive double auction. This
indicates that competition has no impact at all and that the anticipation of
reciprocal eﬀort choices is the major determinant of wage formation under
incomplete contracts.
The work of Bewley (1995, 1997) and Blinder and Choi (1990) provides field
evidence on the reasons for downward wage rigidity. According to Bewley the
major reason why managers are reluctant to cut wages in a recesssion is the fear
that wage cuts may inhibit work performance. Managers are afraid that pay cuts
‘express hostility to the work force’ and will be ‘interpreted as an insult’. Similar
findings are presented in the study of Blinder and Choi (1990). That consider-
ations of fairness and reciprocity are important determinants of firms’ wage
settings is also suggested by the work of Agell and Lundborg (1995), Campbell
and Kamlani (1997) and Levine (1993).
Next we turn to the question whether reciprocity can indeed account for
a positive correlation between profitability and wages and whether this gives rise
to non-compensating wage diﬀerentials. The previously discussed experiments on
downward wage rigidity already show unambiguously that workers earn rents.
This follows from the fact that in the experiments workers’ reservation wage,
which is exactly known by the experimenter, was below the actual contract
wage. The existence of rents is also indicated by the many wage bids below the
prevailing wage level in Fig. 2a. It remains to be shown that the rents paid to the
workers vary with firms’ profitability.
Fehr et al. (1996) have conducted competitive market experiments in which
experimental firms diﬀered according to their profit opportunities. Once
a worker had accepted a firm’s wage oﬀer and before she made her eﬀort choice
she was informed about the profit opportunity of the firm. This procedure
ensured that only the eﬀort decision but not the contract acceptance decision of
the worker is aﬀected by the firm’s profit opportunity. Both firms and workers
knew this information revelation procedure in advance. Fig. 3 shows the
average rent paid to the workers at diﬀerent levels of the profit opportunity. As
one can see there is a clear positive correlation which is also supported by formal
statistical tests. This result is compatible with evidence on rent-sharing provided
by Blanchflower et al. (1996) and Hildreth and Oswald (1997) who show that
854 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Fig. 3. The relation between workers’ rents and firms’ profit opportunities. Source: Fehr et al.
(1996).
there is a positive relation between long-run wages and the profitability of
non-unionized companies or non-unionized industries, respectively.
6. Homo reciprocans as a norm enforcer
Social norms are ubiquitous. There are norms against cheating and lying,
against and in favor of conspicuous consumption (Veblen, 1899), norms of
belonging to clubs, political parties, peer groups and unions (Booth, 1985;
Naylor, 1989; Kandel and Lazear, 1992), voting norms (Knack, 1992), norms
that restrict production under piece rate regimes (Roethlisberger and Dickson,
1947; Whyte, 1955) and against overusing common pool resources (Ostrom,
1990). A particularly important class of norms is related to collective action
problems (Elster, 1989; Opp, 1996). In our views there can, thus, be little doubt
that human behavior is shaped by social norms. They constitute constraints on
individual behavior beyond the legal, information and budget constraints usu-
ally considered by economists. We will argue and show below that reciprocity
provides a key mechanism for the enforcement of social norms. In view of the
fact that most social relations in neighborhoods, families and work places are
not governed by explicit agreements but by social norms the role of reciprocity
as a norm enforcement device is perhaps its most important function.
Before we proceed further it is necessary to define a social norm more
precisely: it is (i) a behavioral regularity that is (ii) based on a socially shared
belief how one ought to behave which triggers (iii) the enforcement of the pre-
scribed behavior by informal social sanctions. The problem of norm enforcement
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 855
can be parsimoniously captured by a situation in which the material payoﬀs
have the structure of a public good. Therefore, let us suppose a one-shot,
n-person game in which each agent decides simultaneously about the contribu-
tion gq to the public good G. Each agent has an endowment y and gq3[0, y].
Furthermore, the material payoﬀs from G imply that free-riding (gq"0) is
a dominant strategy, while gq"y for all i"1,2, n maximizes joint gains. In
this context a social norm can be thought of as a behavioral regularity in which
everybody should contribute gq"g'0 and where g is enforced by informal
social sanctions.
To what extent can reciprocity provide the basis for the enforcement of g'0?
First of all, positive reciprocity implies that subjects are willing to contribute
something to G if others are also willing to contribute. This follows from the fact
that a contribution to G provides positive externalities, i.e., represents a kind
action, which induces reciprocally motivated subjects to contribute, too. Thus,
positive reciprocity implies a conditionally cooperative behavior that makes it
easier to sustain g. However, to sustain g as a stable behavioral regularity
suﬃciently many agents in the n-person game have to be motivated by reciproc-
ity. That is, these agents have to be willing to forgo the material gains from
defection provided that all other agents have the same willingness. This argu-
ment also shows that even if many people had such a conditional willingness to
forgo the gains from defection the successful establishment of a norm g is not
guaranteed. Only if people also believe that others have this willingness and if
they are able to coordinate on a particular g3[0, y] the norm g can be sustained.
However, since we know already from Section 1 that a non-negligible minority
of subjects is not motivated by reciprocity it is unlikely that g'0 can be
sustained as an equilibrium.
Note that in the previously described simultaneous move game there are no
opportunities for direct retaliation in response to observed free riding. Thus,
negative reciprocity can play no role except that if subjects expect that others
free-ride they can ‘punish’ others by free-riding, too. This means that in the
presence of pessimistic expectations about the behavior of others, negative
reciprocity is even likely to make it more diﬃcult to sustain a norm g.
 The
impact of negative reciprocity however changes radically if subjects are given
the costly opportunity to directly punish the behavior of others after they
could observe others’ contribution decisions. Under these conditions, homo
This argument is rigorously developed in Fehr and Schmidt (1997) where the term ‘suﬃciently
many’ also is defined exactly.
This public good game provides, therefore, an example where selfish types can induce reciprocal
types to make ‘selfish’ choices. Although the motivation to free-ride is diﬀerent for the reciprocal
type, in the end the behavior of the selfish and the reciprocal type is indistinguishable, i.e., both types
free-ride completely.
856 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Fig. 4. Distribution of contributions in the final period of public good games with and without
punishment. Source: Fehr and Ga ¨ chter (1996).
reciprocans has the opportunity to discipline those subjects who are selfish or
insuﬃciently motivated by positive reciprocity.
It is important to stress that the addition of costly punishment to the
simultaneous public good game does not change the contribution decisions if all
subjects are selfish. Since punishing is costly for the punisher a selfish subject will
never punish and, as a consequence, the punishment opportunity provides
merely the possibility of incredible threats. Therefore, contribution decisions will
be unaﬀected. Yet, in the presence of subjects motivated by negative reciprocity
the punishment opportunity allows to make credible threats. Homo reciprocans
is likely to interpret defection from g as a hostile act that deserves to be
punished. Therefore, negative reciprocity is a key mechanism for the enforce-
ment of g.
Fehr and Ga¨ chter (1996) have conducted public good experiments with and
without punishment opportunities as described above. Each game was repeated
ten times. Material payoﬀs and the fact that the game ends in period ten have
been common knowledge. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of contributions to G in
both treatment conditions in period ten.
As one can see there is a dramatic behavioral shift across conditions. While in
the game without punishment 53% of the subjects free-ride completely and
roughly two-thirds choose gq43, almost 80% of the subjects in the punishment
condition chose complete cooperation (gq"y"20). The analysis in Fehr and
Ga ¨ chter (1996) also shows that the punishment imposed on defectors was the
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 857
bigger the lower their contribution levels. Moreover, questionnaire evidence
about subjects’ motives strongly suggest that the deviation from the prescriptive
norm of conditional cooperation causes resentment and the impulse to punish.
The results thus lend support to the view that homo reciprocans is indeed a key
player in the enforcement of social norms.
References
Abbink, K., Irlenbusch, B., Renner, E., 1997. The moonlighting game. Discussion Paper, University
of Bonn.
Agell, J., Lundborg, P., 1995. Theories of pay and unemployment: Survey evidence from Swedish
manufacturing firms. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 97, 295—308.
Akerlof, G., 1982. Labor contracts as partial gift exchange. Quarterly Journal of Economics 97,
543—569.
Akerlof, G., Yellen, J., 1988. Fairness and unemployment. American Economic Review (P&P) 78,
44—49.
Baker, G., 1992. Incentive contracts and performance measurement. Journal of Political Economy
100, 598—614.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., McCabe, K., 1995. Trust reciprocity and social history. Games and Economic
Behavior 10, 122—142.
Bewley, T., 1995. A depressed labor market as explained by participants. American Economic
Review (P&P) 85, 250—254.
Bewley, T., 1997. A depressed labor market as explained by participants. Manuscript, Dept. of
Economics, Yale University.
Blanchflower, D., Oswald, A., Sanfey, P., 1996. Wages, profits, and rent-sharing. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 111(2), 227—252.
Blinder, A., Choi, D., 1990. A shred of evidence on theories of wage stickiness. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105, 1003—1016.
Bolton, G., Zwick, R., 1995. Anonymity versus punishment in ultimatum bargaining. Games and
Economic Behavior 10, 95—121.
Booth, A., 1985. The free rider problem and an social custom model of trade union membership.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 253—261.
Camerer, C., Thaler, R., 1995. Ultimatums, dictators, and manners. Journal of Economic Perspect-
ives 9, 209—219.
Cameron, L., 1995. Raising the stakes in the ultimatum game: experimental evidence from Indonesia.
Discussion Paper, Princeton University.
Campbell, Carl III, Kamlani, K., 1997. The reasons for wage rigidity: evidence from a survey of firms.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 759—789.
Charness, G., 1996. Attribution and reciprocity in a labor market: an experimental investigation.
Mimeo., University of California at Berkeley.
De Waal, F., 1991. The Chimpanzee’s sense of social regularity and its relation to the human sense of
justice. American Behavioral Scientist 34, 335—349.
Deci, E., Ryan, R., 1985. Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human Behavior. Plenum
Press, New York.
Elster, J., 1989. The Cement of Society— A Study of Social Order. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Fehr, E., Falk, A., 1996. Wage rigidity in a competitive incomplete contract market. Discussion
Paper, Univ. of Zu ¨ rich.
858 E. Fehr, S. Ga¨chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859
Fehr, E., Ga ¨ chter, S., 1996. Cooperation and punishment— an experimental analysis of norm
formation and norm enforcement. Discussion Paper, Univ. of Zu ¨ rich.
Fehr, E., Ga ¨ chter, S., 1997. How eﬀective are trust- and reciprocity-based incentives? In: Ben-Ner, A.,
Putterman, L., (Eds.), Economics, Values and Organizations, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Fehr, E., Schmidt, K., 1997. A theory of fairness, competition and cooperation. Discussion Paper,
Univ. of Zurich.
Fehr, E., Tougareva, E., 1995. Do high stakes remove reciprocal fairness— evidence from Russia.
Discussion Paper, Univ. of Zurich.
Fehr, E., Ga ¨ chter, S., Kirchsteiger, G., 1996. Reciprocal fairness and noncompensating wage
diﬀerentials. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 152(4), 608—640.
Fehr, E., Ga¨ chter, S., Kirchsteiger, G., 1997. Reciprocity as a contract enforcement device. Econo-
metrica 65, 833—860.
Fehr, E., Kirchler, E., Weichbold, A., Ga¨ chter, S., 1994. When social norms overpower
competition— gift exchange in experimental labour markets. Journal of Labor Economics,
forthcoming.
Fehr, E., Kirchsteiger, G., Riedl, A., 1993. Does fairness prevent market clearing? An experimental
investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 437—460.
Frey, B., 1997. Not Just For the Money— An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation. Edward
Elgar, Cheltenham.
Ga ¨ chter, S., Falk, A., 1997. Reputation or reciprocity? Mimeo., Univ of Zu ¨ rich.
Gale, J., Binmore, K., Samuelson, L., 1995. Learning to be imperfect : the ultimatum game. Games
and Economic Behavior 8, 56—90.
Gu ¨ th, W., 1995a. An evolutionary approach to explaining cooperative behavior by reciprocal
incentives. International Journal of Game Theory 24, 323—344.
Gu ¨ th, W., 1995b. On ultimatum bargaining experiments— a personal review. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 27, 329—344.
Gu ¨ th, W., Schmittberger, R., Schwarze, B., 1982. An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3, 367—388.
Hart, O., 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Hildreth, A., Oswald, A., 1997. Rent sharing and wages: evidence from company and establishment
panels. Journal of Labor Economics 15, 318—337.
Holmstro ¨ m, B., Milgrom, P., 1991. Multi-task principal—agent analyses: incentive contracts, asset
ownership and job-design. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 7, 24—52.
Huck, S., Oechssler, J., 1996. The indirect evolutionary approach to explaining fair allocations.
Mimeo., Humboldt University Berlin.
Jacobsen, E., Sadrieh, A., 1996. Experimental proof for the motivational importance of reciprocity.
Discussion Paper No. B-386, University of Bonn.
Kandel, E., Lazear, E., 1992. Peer pressure and partnerships. Journal of Political Economy 100,
801—817.
Knack, S., 1992. Civic norms, social sanctions, and voter turnout. Rationality and Society 4, 133—156.
Kolm, S., 1994. The theory of reciprocity and the choice of economic systems: an introduction.
Investigationes Econo ´ micas 18, 67—95.
Levine, D., 1993. Fairness, markets, and ability to pay: evidence from compensation executives.
American Economic Review 83, 1241—1259.
Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1992. Economics, Organization and Management. Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliﬀs, NJ.
Miller, S., 1997. Strategienuntersuchung zum Investitionsspiel von Berg, Dickhaut, McCabe.
Diplomarbeit, University of Bonn.
Naylor, R., 1989. Strikes, free riders, and social customs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104,
771—785.
E. Fehr, S. Ga¨ chter / European Economic Review 42 (1998) 845—859 859
Opp, K.D., 1996. Moral incentives and collective political action. Discussion Paper, University of
Leipzig.
Ostrom, E., 1990. Governing the Common— The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Roethlisberger, F.J., Dickson, W.J., 1947. Management and the Worker: An Account of a Research
Program Conducted by the Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works, Chicago. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Roth, A., 1995. Bargaining experiments. In: Roth, A., Kagel, J. (Eds.), Handbook of Experimental
Economics. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Veblen, T., 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class. Houghton Miﬄin, Boston.
Whyte, W., 1955. Money and Motivation. Harper and Brothers, New York.
Williamson, O., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Free Press, New york.
