THE ECONOMIST AS SCIENTIST, ENGINEER OR PLUMBER?
BY HUEI-CHUN SU* AND DAVID COLANDER**
Abstract
Abstract
Some well-known economists suggest that a good economist should act like an engineer, a
surgeon, a dentist, or even a plumber. These metaphors are useful in helping economists reflect
the nature of economics and their role in society. But which is the most sensible one? This paper
argues that economists should be playing all these roles and more, because economics is not a
single entity, and each entity has separate goals, methods, and boundaries. To take this
multiplicity of roles into account this paper argues that in addition to the traditional boundary
that delineates the disciplinary domain of economics against other sciences, an overarching
boundary between economic science and applied policy needs to be recognized. It then examines
Duflo’s economist as plumber metaphor and suggests that a better metaphor for Duflo’s purpose
would be “general contractor”, a metaphor that, if accepted, would suggest radical change in
training applied policy economists.
* Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford.
** Economics, Middlebury University.
Contact: huei-chun.su@inet.ox.ac.uk
colander@middlebury.edu
This “preprint” is the peer-reviewed and accepted typescript of an article that is
forthcoming in revised form, after minor editorial changes, in the Journal of the History of
Economic Thought (ISSN: 1053-8372), issue TBA. Copyright to the journal’s articles is
held by the History of Economics Society (HES), whose exclusive licensee and publisher for
the journal is Cambridge University Press.
(https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-the-history-of-economic-thought)
This preprint may be used only for private research and study and is not to be distributed
further.
The preprint may be cited as follows:
Su, Huei-Chun and David Colander. The Economist as Scientist, Engineer or Plumber? Journal
of the History of Economic Thought (forthcoming). Preprint at SocArXiv,
osf.io/preprints/socarxiv
1
I. INTRODUCTION
What is an economist’s job like? A good metaphor helps economists reflect the nature
of economics as a discipline and their role in society. It has been described as dentists (e.g.
Keynes 1930), engineers (e.g. Mankiw 2006; Colander 2013a; Roth 2002), and surgeons (Romer
2016). One of the most recent and intriguing analogies was given by Esther Duflo at her
American Economic Association Richard Ely Lecture in 2017 (Duflo 2017). She compares part
of economists’ job with that of a plumber, and urges economists to adopt a mindset of the
plumber for their work.
For most economists, who consider economics the queen of social sciences, Duflo’s
metaphor is no doubt radical, and probably a bit insulting and humiliating. Dentists, surgeons
and engineers are at least professionals, and closer to the scientists which most economists think
of themselves as. But plumber? That may be pushing the boundary for economists’ humility
quotient. Nevertheless, Duflo’s plumber metaphor is more than a call for humility; it involves
examining how economics should be done. Hence, whether her metaphor makes sense or not
does not depend on how the economics profession feels about it, but whether economists can do
a better job if they adopt the mindset of plumber. The same logic applies to other metaphors.
In this paper we argue that economists should be playing all these jobs and more,
because economics is not a single entity, and each entity is better done with different
methodologies and mindsets. This view is directly related to the question of what the boundaries
of economics should be. We suggest that an additional new set of boundaries is needed besides
the conventional disciplinary boundaries. Traditionally, the boundaries of economics are drawn
to define the disciplinary domain. In many economist’s mind, the boundaries of economics as a
2
discipline are implicitly specified in reference to science (whatever science means to them). If
one takes this view, one sees doing economics as doing science, an economist as a scientist.
The standard way of thinking of boundaries is, in our view, insufficient in that it
subjects all aspects of economics to the same boundaries when it makes much more sense for
different aspects of economics, especially economic science and applied economics, to have
different boundaries.1
A key reason to differentiate the boundaries is that applied work is likely to face
different problems than scientific work. Policy, for example, falls within the boundary of applied
economics, but to the degree it requires integrating normative judgements, it needs to go outside
the boundary of scientific economics for aspects of its work. Differentiating the boundaries
between applied work and scientific work helps us make sense of Duflo’s metaphor and adds
insight into the role of economists. We believe that Duflo, and modern economists generally, do
not adequately recognize the usefulness of separating science from applied work; they have a
strong tendency to think of applied economics and economic science as having overlapping and
congruent boundaries. This causes economists to fall short in various roles which they should
fulfil. We argue that “scientist” should not be the overall category within which all economists fit.
Economics includes science, but it is not just science. The boundaries of scientific economics
should not be confused with the boundaries of economics.
Like skin, while being a constraint, allows the body to form a shape, boundaries of
economics legitimize economists’ focusing on one dimension of multi-facetted social
phenomena and adopting the appropriate methods for their study. The boundaries also signify the
1 In this paper, we use the terms “scientific economics” and “economic science” interchangeably.
3
jobs most economists do and the roles they play. Boundaries of economics matter. Hence, before
examining what roles economists should play in the final section, we first argue in Section II that
a new way of thinking about the boundaries is needed as it is essential for the economics
profession to improve its ability to provide relevant and quality policy analysis. We outline our
suggested approach with a focus on what we mean by “applied economics” in Section III. We
then in Section IV bring the argument back to Duflo’s plumbing metaphor, and argue that a
better metaphor for the point she is making would be a “general contractor” analogy. The general
applied policy economist is best seen as the person who brings economic specialists together--the
scientist, the craftsman, the plumber and the engineer to achieve some goal; the general
economist needs to be an all-rounder, knowing to whom to go for specialized knowledge. The
boundaries of the general contractor’s focus are indeterminate and dependent on the problem
being considered.
II. BOUNDARIES MATTER
The conventional way of drawing boundaries: its function and insufficiency
From the late eighteenth century to the early twentieth century, the boundaries of
economics were drawn by subject matter, namely, wealth and material welfare. Changes in
boundaries occurred over time, away from material wealth boundaries. By the end of 1960s, the
scope of economics was no longer defined as the study of wealth, but instead by the theoretical
model used to study choice—constrained optimization, and the empirical implementation of that
model with econometrics.
Even though the boundaries of economics presented in the textbooks may appear to be
similar for more than fifty years since 1960s, the actual boundaries have never stopped evolving
4
as what economists do continues changing, some of which is on the edge of economics or even
outside the boundaries. The lively development of economics in the past few decades has
significantly changed the face of economics as well as its boundaries.
For instance, with the development of behavioral economics, and with game theory
replacing calculus as the theoretical engine of analysis, modern economics widened its
boundaries to include a wider range of empirical methods. Econometrics was supplemented by
various types of experiments. Economists adopted carefully specified experimental methods and
randomized controlled trials became the gold standard for applied micro economists. Boundaries
have shifted: they are no longer defined by constrained optimization. Instead, what used to be
seen at the margin or outside economics has been recognized as the mainstream. The fact that
Daniel Kahneman and Richard Thaler, pioneer behavioral economists, won the Nobel prizes in
2002 and 2018, and that Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo and Michael Kremer were the winners in
2019 for transforming development economics with experimental research methods is a good
demonstration for this. Boundaries have shifted: even though it is not clear where exactly the
new boundaries of economics are and what holds them together.
Either defined by wealth or methods, the above-mentioned boundaries in the different
phases of the history of economics have all served a similar function, that is, to delineate the
scope of economics as a discipline in order to differentiate its subject-matter and methods from
other disciplines. Conceptualizing boundaries in this way per se is not a problem. However,
problems arise when such disciplinary boundaries are assumed to be the boundaries of a science.
Our argument is that boundaries of economics as a whole are not the same as
boundaries of economic science. Thinking about boundaries of economics in terms of boundaries
5
of economic science, in our view, misses an important element of the boundary dispute. It forces
one to see the challenge faced by economics profession through a narrow perspective and as a
result, issues beyond the boundaries of economic science tend to be neglected, in particular,
issues in the policy domain. Therefore, we argue that a new way of thinking boundaries is
needed. Specifically, the overarching boundary between science and applied policy needs to be
recognized, with each activity being seen as having its own scope and method.
Introducing an extra set of boundaries: a revival of the classical tradition
Our proposal to draw boundaries between economic science and applied economics is
by no means novel. It is actually a call for returning to the classical tradition that treats
conducting scientific economic enquires and providing economic policy advice as separate
activities with different natures. Hence, it is important to articulate what this tradition is.
Nassau Senior (1790-1864) is one of the key figures attempting to establish economics
as a science in early nineteenth century England. In his book An Outline of The Science of
Political Economy ([1836] 1951), he clearly announces a breakup with economists before him
and confines political economy to be a scientific study of the nature, the production and the
distribution of wealth.⁠ As the first Drummond Professor of Political Economy at Oxford, the first
chair of political economy in England, Senior’s approach to economics was well received at the
time.
In a similar vein, John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) made a more thorough and complete
discussion on treating political economy as science. In Mill’s hand, political economy became a
separate discipline in two senses. First, it was a discipline separate from other social sciences;
second, it was a scientific discipline separate from ethics.
6
Because of the separation in the first sense, it was possible for classical political
economists to examine economic phenomena without constantly blending political and
sociological elements into their formal study. Economics becoming a separate discipline was
accompanied by the division of labor, allowing different disciplines to study specific dimensions
of social phenomena with the methods appropriate for the investigation. However, this advantage
came with a cost. The conclusions reached by individual disciplines were partial. It follows that
the conclusions reached by economics alone cannot provide policy prescription. Once the
disciplines had separated, to reach a policy recommendation, a collaboration among disciplines
became required.
With the limitation of economics as a separate discipline in mind, those economists we
classified in the classical tradition2 all share a similar view on constraining themselves from
making policy advice by grounding based on economic theorems alone. For instance, at the
beginning of his book, Senior issued a warning that it is not the job of an economist to
recommend or dissuade using the conclusion of economic science as the sole or principal guides
in actual conduct of affairs. One of the key reasons for Senior to justify this warning is that
policy making requires considering all the causes which may promote or impede the general
human welfare whilst economists as scientific theorist have considered only one of them, namely,
wealth. (Senior [1836] 1951, pp. 2-3)
Similarly, Mill is fully aware of the limitation caused by the artificially drawn
boundaries. He gave a clear warning about it. In this context, Mill stresses that “the mere
political economist, he who has studied no science but Political Economy, if he attempt to apply
2 Note that this does not include Adam Smith.
7
his science to practice, will fail” (Mill [1844] 1967, p. 331) and “the didactic writer on the
subject will naturally combine in his exposition, with the truths of the pure science, as many of
the practical modifications as will, in his estimation, be most conducive to the usefulness of his
work” (Mill [1844] 1967, p. 323). These statements are made to appeal for attention to the
problem caused by the isolation of political economy from other social sciences, rather than
ethics.
Our call here is to revive this Classical recognition of the difference between economic
science and applied economics. Using Colander’s (2013b) words, it is necessary to keep a
firewall between theorems of economic science and policy advice.
This Classical tradition was further elaborated and summarized by John Neville Keynes
in his Scope and Method of Political Economy (1890) in which he distinguished three branches
of economics—normative, positive, and art. Normative economics was a philosophical
consideration of the goals. Positive economics was a scientific consideration of the workings of
the economy. The art of economics was a blend of the two, with vaguely defined boundaries and
in large part non-economic. Boundaries depended on which branch one is working in. Applied
economics belonged in the art of economics, which meant that it had different boundaries than
did the science of economics. Within this tradition, whatever the scope and method of positive
economics was, the methodology of applied policy economics was not dependent on it, and
should be considered separately.
Rethinking the boundaries
This Classical tradition was lost in first half of the twentieth century, and was gradually
replaced with the new approach that did not differentiate the boundaries of economic science and
8
applied policy. In the new approach one moves directly from the theoretical conclusions to
policy prescription (Colander 2009, 2011, 2018).
Here we do not intend to give a thorough review of how the classical tradition got lost
as it is beyond the scope of the paper. Rather, we use Robbins, who is usually seen as the turning
point of the changing boundaries in the early twentieth century, as an example to demonstrate the
difference between the conventional understanding of boundaries and the boundaries we are
advocating in this paper.
In principle, the additional set of boundaries proposed in this paper is to delineate
different entities within the discipline of economics as a whole. It is different from the traditional
concept of boundaries that drawing the outer boundaries of economics as a discipline. Failing to
recognize the difference of the two is one of the main causes leading to misinterpret Robbins’s
position, a misinterpretation that had significantly influenced the development of economics in
the twentieth century.
The misinterpretation is understandable given that boundaries were still understood in
the conventional sense while Robbins was in effect drawing the boundaries of economics in a
new sense without being aware of the difference. In his well-known book Essay on the Nature
and Significance of Economic Science, Robbins argued that the science of economics had no
place for value judgements, and that the theoretical branch of economics could be defined as “the
science which studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which
have alternative uses” (Robbins [1932] 1935, p. 16). He also argued that there was no scientific
basis for interpersonal utility comparisons and hence they could not be part of scientific
economics. Robbins’s position has been understood as one arguing that if interpersonal
9
comparisons couldn’t be made in science, they couldn’t be made in economics. Indeed,
according to the conventional account of history of economics (e.g. Blaug 1997), Robbins’s
argument undermined the utilitarian foundations of Pigovian applied policy welfare economics
and led to the rise of the new welfare economics based on social welfare functions. But it only
holds if applied policy economics is interpreted as having to fall within the boundaries of science.
That was not what Robbins intended.
As Robbins argued in his Ely Lecture, what he intended to suggest is that economists
deal with normative judgements in a different branch of economics separate from the scientific
branch of economics. He calls this branch Political Economy. According to Robbins, Political
Economy applies the technical apparatus of analytical economics to realize aims whose
formulation lies outside economics in the stricter sense of the word, namely, scientific economics.
Political Economy involves not only all the models of analysis, but also “explicit or implicit
judgements of value that are usually involved when economists discuss assessments of benefits
and the reverse or recommendations for policy” (Robbins 1981, p. 8).
Thus, in Robbins’s vision of economics, there would be both a scientific branch and an
active applied policy branch that dealt with integrating scientific and ethical elements.
Economics after him did not follow this path. Because it wasn’t appreciated by later economists
that applied economics had different boundaries and nature other than scientific economics,
Robbins’s attempt to define the boundaries of scientific economics to not include moral
considerations had the unintended and undesirable side effect of excluding serious consideration
of moral analysis from applied policy economics, precisely the opposite of his intention.
Why the new concept of boundaries is important
10
With the new concept of boundaries, we believe, economists could better understand the
nature of different entities of economics and better communicate with each other. It is fair to say
that failing to draw boundaries between different entities of economics has prevented economists
from communicating effectively and caused obstacles to reforming economics. A noticeable
example is the apparent conflict between those who argue for developing more complex models
and those who intend to bring ethics back to economics in reaction to the 2008 financial crisis.
The former considers the problem of economics to be that its models are too simple to capture
the complexity of economic systems. In contrast, the latter blames the mainstream economics for
neglecting ethical considerations and argues that this problem cannot be addressed by adopting
different models however complex they are.
At first glance, these two views seem to be irreconcilable. But the disagreement is only
apparent because the problems these two camps try to solve actually fall into two different
branches of economics. For those who attempt to adopt more complex models, the concept of
economics in their mind is mainly the scientific branch of economics. In contrast, in the mind of
those who intend to bring ethics back to economics, the concept of economics mainly falls in the
applied policy branch of economics. In our view, both changes are needed, but they involve quite
different methodologies. To argue that ethics has to be integrated into economic analysis based
on scientific methodology makes it much more difficult to integrate them in. Accepting that
science and applied policy have different boundaries allows a richer discussion of applied policy
issues.
It is important to note that not all studies related to ethics will necessarily fall into the
realm of applied economics. What separates the scientific branch of economics from the applied
one is not the exclusion of issues concerning moral norms or moral preferences, but the absence
11
of normative judgements. In the past two decades, with abundant empirical evidences, a growing
literature attempts to disprove narrow interpretations of Homo economicus, a classic assumption
of human nature in mainstream economics. Samuel Bowles for one demonstrates in his book The
Moral Economy (2016) with evidences from laboratory and field experiments that moral and
other noneconomic motives and preferences such as altruism, reciprocity, trust and so on often
play crucial roles in influencing our economic behavior, including in the market and non-market
setting. Despite being used for recommendations for policy design, the analysis of how human
behavior is influenced by moral norms as well as moral preferences is a study of “what is”, not
“what ought to be”. Such an study should follow scientific methods, and this type of study
should not be conflated with the study of ethics as it often happens today. This likely confusion
was anticipated by J. N. Keynes who argued that ‘political economy may recognize the operation
of moral motives in the economic world, and yet not become an ethical science’ (Keynes [1890]
1917, p. 46). Studying moral dispositions or moral behavior as a fact is a business quite different
from studying how these facts can and should help inform the formulation of policy.
We do not pretend that reintroducing the boundaries between the scientific branch of
economics and the applied branch of economics will resolve all the problems faced by
economics. It is true that this old classification is not perfect and has some challenges awaiting
answers. Yet, discarding this tradition because of its imperfection is like throwing the baby out
with the bathwater.
As the allocation of scarce resource definition of all economics lost its significance and
the corresponding boundaries of economics crumbled, it is now time for economists to
reconsider the path that was not taken in the early twentieth century and returning to the
12
boundaries of economics that Robbins intended to draw, which require a separation of applied
economics from scientific economics.
IV. APPLIED ECONOMICS
It is not an easy task to draw boundaries between scientific economics and applied
policy economics even if one accepts the necessity of drawing such boundaries. One of the
difficulties results from the fact that the meaning of “applied” is vague and the concept of
“application” in economics is a loose one. Since the term “applied economics” has been used by
economists to refer to several different things, let us first make it clear what we mean by applied
economics or the applied branch of economics.
Nature, scope and methodology
We can easily identify at least three meanings commonly used among economists. First,
it means empirical work used to test the validity of theory. Second, it means the application of
theoretical conclusions to policy advice. Third, it means the application of theoretical cores to
various fields (see Backhouse and Biddle 2000; Backhouse and Cherrier 2017; Cherrier 2017).
Our focus is on the second of these—applied policy economics. Accordingly, we are quite
comfortable with the above first and third types of work belonging to a category called science as
long as their aim is to find facts, rather than to guide policy or action. But the second category is
best separated out as having different boundaries.
If we map our distinction between economic science and applied policy economics to J.
N. Keynes’s tripartite division of economics, applied policy economics roughly corresponds to
an art of political economy.
13
Despite coining the term ‘art of political economy’, Keynes is actually cautious with
using it as he worried that it may cause misunderstanding as if it is a body of precepts which can
be completed exclusively based on the science of economics. Keynes’s concern reflects the
difficulty of drawing clear-cut boundaries of applied economics due to its multidisciplinary
character.
Even though the boundaries of applied economics are fuzzy, we can still roughly
categorize the knowledge belonging to applied economics into three types.
 First, knowledge from other scientific disciplines (not only mathematics, physics
from which economics used to borrow the tools or concepts, but more importantly,
the neighboring disciplines in social sciences and humanities, such as psychology,
political science, sociology, social and cultural anthropology, human geography,
history, etc.)
 Second, non-scientific knowledge that does not involve moral values. This
includes knowledge which is not systematically derived from scientific and
organized disciplines but obtained from individual experience and observation.
This type of knowledge is often dispersed among individuals, causing difficulty
for policy making (Hayek 1945).
 Third, knowledge regarding morals.
Because applied policy has to incorporate these different types of knowledge in order to
reach objective conclusions, the methods appropriate for applied economics are different from
those appropriate for economic science. Unlike economic science which has to strictly follow
14
scientific methods, applied policy economics adopts much wider ranges of methods—using
philosophical methods to deal with moral issues, and engineering methods to deal with non-
economic issues that are important but have not yet been answered by science. This does not
mean anything goes; it simply means that applied policy is a craft that practitioners develop.
Each specialty has what engineering methodologist Billy Vaughn Koen (2003) calls the “state of
the art”. We call this applied policy method of doing applied economics the engineering
approach subject to the engineering methodology spelled out by Koen.
An economist dealing with policy would use a methodology different from scientific
methodology. On the one hand it is less restrictive; it allows back-of-the-envelope calculations
and rough estimation of needed parameters. On the other hand, it demands knowledge and
judgements far beyond scientific knowledge. Engineering is not science precisely because it is
concerned with solutions to problems, not purely understanding. If a policy seems to work, even
if inconsistent with current scientific theory, the economic engineer will use it, adding a “fudge
factor” to account for the lack of firm scientific basis. The reason is that economists as engineers
are required to do much more than applying scientific theories, and will be limited in their role if
they are required to always follow scientific methodology.
Engineering methodology includes scientific methodology, but is more expansive, and
far less restrictive. Engineers determine the controlling methodology for how much science,
other knowledge, and moral reasoning are used, following current best practices.3
Where to draw the line: an illustration
3 For more discussion on the engineering approach, see Colander 2018, Colander and Freedman
2018, Chapter 8.
15
Admittedly, it is not easy to draw clear boundaries between scientific and applied
economics. At the conceptual level, these two branches are clear. The difficulty of drawing the
lines resides mainly in the fact that in practice these two branches often exist together.
Economists can easily move from one realm to the other in the same piece of work without being
aware that they have crossed the boundaries. Even the first-class economists could fail to
appreciate adequately the difference in the nature of science and policy and consequently impair
the quality of their policy analysis with restrictive methods unsuitable for policy.
Take Raj Chetty as an example. “Yes, economics is a science”, he announces, in his
defense of economics against skeptics who charge it to be a fake science after the Nobel Prize in
Economic Sciences were awarded to economists of opposing views on the same issue in the
same year (Chetty 2013). Chetty’s own work largely aims at making economics an empirical
science, a science like medicine. Most of his economic research indeed deserves the name of
science and “has the ability to inform policy decisions on the basis of evidence instead of
ideology” as he wishes. However, applying empirical findings directly for policy guidance
without drawing a line between policy and science could lead to misleading conclusions as if
policy ought to be studied with scientific methods and nothing else. This can be shown in one of
Chetty’s works on taxation.
In his paper “Salience and Taxation”, Chetty and his co-authors use a field and quasi-
experiments to show that the visibility of the tax-inclusive price matters to the consumption
behaviour (Chetty et al. 2009). Their experiments demonstrate that how consumers react to taxes
can be studied empirically, and how the empirical results from experiments can be used to inform
policy design. Yet, as soon as they move to the discussion of the implications of their empirical
results for tax policy, they lose their grounding. In discussing how their results affect policy, they
16
integrate those results into a standard formal welfare policy analysis. In so doing, they develop a
formal theoretical framework for applied welfare analysis that they argue can accommodate
salience effects, which they characterize as an optimization error made by consumers.
The welfare analysis done in the paper is full of scientific aura, but it focuses solely on
“efficiency costs” and completely neglects any discussion of fundamental issues that from an
engineering perspective, will likely be highly important, such as fairness and transparency. The
experiments show that posting tax-inclusive price tags reduces demand, which suggests that tax-
exclusive prices might fool buyers into spending more than they intended. “All-inclusive
pricing”, as Werner Antweiler (2016) points out, “is thus a matter of fairness and transparency”.
An apparent scientific policy analysis can produce conclusions more biased than an engineering
analysis that explicitly includes considerations that cannot be studied scientifically. In the case of
policy analysis, the attempt of being scientific doesn't guarantee objectivity.
Chetty’s case is not unique. In fact, Chetty’s faith in scientific economics informing
policy decision is commonly shared by the champions of evidence-based policy, an approach
which has become the vogue for policymaking in many different areas across several countries,
among international organizations and NGOs over the past two decades. In the field of
development economics, evidence-based policymaking has been extensively applied to issues
such as poverty, schooling, healthcare, etc. The urge for evidence-based policymaking in
accounting and financial markets regulation is also on the rise in recent years.4 The evidence-
4 For the opportunities and challenges of adopting evidence-based approach for accounting and
financial policies and regulations, see Leuz (2018).
17
based policy movement aims to improve the quality of decision-making by replacing policy-
making based on ideologies or faiths with those based on scientific evidence.
We appreciate the intention of improving the quality of policymaking by grounding it
on robust empirical evidences, but the standard randomized controlled trials (RCTs), which play
a major role in the evidence-based policy approach, are inadequate in answering at least two key
issues of policy analysis. First, on the analytical and explanatory side, conceptual frameworks
and judgments are required to make sense of data and evidence and to identify the causal
mechanism; what is considered evidence depends on one’s framework. As is the case with the
traditional deductive methods in scientific economics, the conclusions derived from the
experimental inductive methods are incomplete and far from definitive: their validity is subject
to the external context. Using the phrases of Cartwright and Hardie (2012), “it worked there”
does not guarantee “it will work here”.5 Second, on the prescriptive side, evidence and data alone
tell us nothing about how the desirability and priorities of policy goals ought to be determined.
5 This limitation of randomized field experiments is recognized by Banerjee and Duflo in a paper
where they responded to the criticisms concerning the environmental dependence of
experimental research in development economics: as they noted, “without assumptions, results
from experiments cannot be generalized beyond their context” (Banerjee and Duflo 2009, p. 16),
but they also noted that the problem of generalizability is not specific to the experimental
approach and believed that this problem ,when related to external validity, can be mitigated
(Banerjee and Duflo 2009, 2017).
18
In summary, scientific evidence can inform policy, but cannot be directly translated into
policy recommendations.6 Ultimately, the practice of basing policy on rigorous scientific
evidence does not make policy analysis and policymaking the sole business of science. Drawing
boundaries between scientific economics and applied economics is crucial for economists to
better grasp the strengths and limitations of the empirical approaches in economic science as well
as their implications to applied economic policy analysis and policymaking.
V. SHOULD ECONOMISTS THINK OF THEMSELVES AS PLUMBERS?
Now that we have developed our arguments, let us return to the metaphor with which
we began the paper—Duflo’s metaphor of economists as plumbers. While we are largely in
agreement with the fundamental point of Duflo’s argument—that applied policy economists need
to take practical implementation problems seriously, we find her metaphor of economist-as-
plumber problematic, and symptomatic of the type problems that arise when scientific economics
and applied policy economics are not differentiated. Put simply, plumbers aren’t scientists, and
for her argument to make sense, economists must accept that it isn’t realistic that an economist
fills both roles. There are at least three issues to be considered with Duflo’s metaphor.
Division of labor and specialization
6 Partly because of this reason, Christian Leuz considers the more modest term “evidence-
informed policymaking” is preferred to “evidence-based policymaking” (Leuz, 2018, p. 600,
emphasis original).
19
The first is the division of labor among economists. This can be considered in two
aspects: first, who should do what in view of the expected roles; second, who is capable of doing
what in view of their training and skills.
Duflo argues that economists should act like plumbers in addition to scientists and
engineers. In her view, each of these mindsets has an important role in policy design: “Scientists
design general frames, engineers turn them into relevant machinery, and plumbers finally make
them work in a complicated, messy policy environment” (Duflo 2017, p. 23). This statement
suggests that for Duflo there are no clear boundaries between science and policy. One of the
potential consequences of mixing the two domains is that scientists are doing something they
cannot do properly if they strictly follow the methodological rules of science.
In contrast to Duflo, we believe that it is economic engineers, not economic scientists,
who should design policy just like it is engineers, not scientists, who are responsible for
designing machines. Designing a reliable machine requires solid scientific knowledge, but
designing a machine per se is not the same as doing science. Similarly, designing a policy is not
the same as doing science, even though the chance for a policy to function properly would
generally be higher if the design of policy is informed by solid scientific evidence.
Another consequence of not adequately differentiating applied policy from economic
science is that the division of labor would likely work less effectively due to the training based
on specialization. According to Duflo, one of the key reasons why economists need the mindset
of a plumber is due to economists’ limited knowledge of the issues at hand. In her words, there
are the “unknown unknowns” that we cannot predict but that will arise anyway. Unlike
economist-as-scientist and economist-as-engineer, the economist-as-plumber “does not have the
20
safety net of a bounded set of assumptions” (2017, p. 3). She has to face and resolve the
problems which do not appear in the models, but do arise in the real world. “If the specific real-
world problem at hand cannot be solved analytically”, Duflo suggests, the economist-as-plumber
“will reach for other tools” (2017, p. 3). She sees field experimentation as an important tool in
the economist-as-plumber’s toolkit.
We agree that the plumber, when laying down the pipe, needs to use all sorts of
knowledge and tools available to her in order to make the plumbing work. However, Duflo’s
plumber metaphor is not suitable for her own purpose, because some jobs delegated by Duflo to
the economist-as-plumber would easily go beyond a plumber’s training and skills. Field
experiments are done by scientists and they follow a well-specified scientific methodology. To
appropriately conduct a randomized field experiment requires a high level of scientific
knowledge and good working knowledge of these methods. Arguably, it is the innovation in
scientific method, rather than the plumbing, entailed in Duflo’s experimental approach to
development economics that won her the title of Nobel Laurate in economic sciences. To do
these experiments right one needs training in scientific methodology; it is unlikely to be done
properly by a plumber who does not have significant training in science or even in engineering.
The difference between a real plumber and an economic scientist imagining herself to
be a plumber can be seen by comparing her approach to that of a self-declared non scientist, Paul
Polak (1931-2019). Polak was a psychiatrist and real estate developer who decided he had plenty
of money and he wanted to spend the rest of his life helping the poor, which he defined as those
with income under $1 a day. He developed a twelve-step guide to practical problem solving that
did not involve randomized control experiments, and he would consider such formal methods as
part and parcel of the failed development efforts that characterize academic approaches to
21
helping the poor. His methodological guides include: Go where the action is. Listen to those who
have the problem. Learn everything you can about the problem’s specific context. Think like a
child. Design to specific cost and price targets. (Polak, 2008, p. 14) None of his directives
involved any economic theory, other than the obvious. None involved formal testing; it was too
expensive. It involved informal testing, trial and error, and correction on the fly. It involved all
types of practical knowledge, but no economic theory. One of his solutions to poverty—low cost
treadle pumps and drip irrigation systems made with inexpensive piping where drip hoses were
created by punching nails in pipe—totally involved plumbing. But it did not involve applied
economists, other than for the economist to recognize that such bottom-up development offers
enormous possibilities that will not be recognized by economists who are not laser focused on an
objective of helping the poor. Polak’s guides are plumbing heuristics, which are grounded on
crystalized plumbing knowledge obtained and accumulated through learning by doing in the field.
We argue that such plumbing heuristics, knowledge, and approaches, even though not scientific,
have great value for practical problem solving, and deserve the attention of economist-as-
engineer when designing economic policies, particularly when scientific knowledge is not
available.7
Economists as general contractors
7 What is called “plumbing knowledge” here corresponds to the second type of knowledge
classified in Section IV. Plumbing heuristics are normative, but their establishment are not
entirely independent from plumbing knowledge, which are positive. Linking the two requires
sensibilities and judgments that go beyond science.
22
The economist as plumber could be a useful metaphor in the right context, but it does
not work well for the type of job to which Duflo refers. Instead of picturing hands-on applied
policy economists as plumbers, we suggest that it would be best to picture them as general
contractors. “General contractor economists” are the economists who actually carry out the
translation of policy design into real world policy.
A general contractor has an overview of the entire project—she is in constant contact
with engineers, plumbers, carpenters, architects, mechanical technicians, and she also knows,
and works with, the customer of the policy integrating his values into the design of the policy.
She doesn’t get an abstract social welfare function given to her. She works with the customer to
determine the content of it, often guiding the customer as to what is feasible and desirable, and
how best to achieve the desired policy goals. Sometimes she plays a relatively value neutral
advisory scientific-like engineering role—given the state-of-the-art knowledge, here is what is
achievable. Other times she plays a psychological advisor role in which she blends normative
and positive aspects of analysis together as an artist would. She translates the customer’s
generally vaguely understood vision into a practical buildable vision. Doing this job well
requires going far beyond what can be determined by science.
Obviously, in real life economists fulfill many different roles. They are scientists,
engineers, and general contractors. That’s what makes economics so difficult. Our point is not
that they should not play multiple roles—it is that they should match their methodology to fit the
role that they are playing.
Taking morals and value judgement seriously
23
In Duflo’s discussion, the major task for the economist-as-plumber is to make sure the
policy, once implemented, will function effectively to achieve the assigned goals. In other words,
what is deemed as desirable goals that a policy aims to achieve has already been determined in
some way and is not under question or dispute. Duflo’s discussion does not explore how the
goals are determined. Presumably, it is not a job of the economist-as-plumber. Instead it is the
job for the economists as design engineer and the economist as general contractor. This indicates
the incompleteness of the plumber metaphor for applied economics.
Moreover, even if there is no disagreement concerning the goals of a policy, when there
is no consensus in scientific findings, what should economists do in order to provide policy
guidelines? The disagreement over the conclusions derived from economic science can result
from many different reasons, but often they do not result from the different views in goals or
from fundamentally different views of science. Disagreements often result from differences in
sensibilities, which scientific methodology cannot resolve. To resolve these disagreements, the
research institutions and the methodology must be designed to arrive at conclusions about these
heuristic judgements. There is no absolute.
In Duflo’s examples, those details missing in scientific models, yet essential for policy
design, are mostly related to the complexity of human behavior and preference. When they do
not match the assumptions of models, on which policy design is based, then policy will not work.
Hence, Duflo emphasizes the importance of behavioral economics, network economics, and
informational economics. In one sense, behavioral economics and informational economics
adjust the policy design by correcting the assumptions of the scientific models, on which the
policy design is originally grounded. But the deviation of what happens in reality from what
models predicts can be caused by reasons other than unrealistic assumptions.
24
These other aspects of applied economics that have been lost are not something that
plumbers could resolve. Science has no problem with adding issues of plumbing in Duflo’s sense.
It does have a problem with adding those aspects of policy that relate to values and sensibilities.
Thinking of economists as plumbers will not integrate moral values back into applied analysis,
marking the second major weakness of Duflo’s metaphor. The more important change will only
occur when the profession develops a methodology that recognizes that policy follows from
various types of judgement (moral or amoral, factual or normative).
Training
We have been noting the shortcomings of the plumber metaphor, but we are not
quibbling over words but rather with the sensibility associated with the words. Our interest is in
how the metaphors affect economist’s training. We see a much larger need for change than does
Duflo. This is the third reason why we consider Duflo’s plumber metaphor unfit. She seems to
believe that economists, with the current training, are well prepared for taking up the plumber’s
role and that this requires only a change in mindsets, not a major change in training.8 We don’t
see this as an accurate description of the current training of economists or as a right prescription
8 It is Duflo’s view that “economists have the disciplinary training to make good plumbers”
(2017, p. 15) and that “plumbing should be an inherent part of our profession: we are well
prepared for it, reasonably good at it” (2017, p. 23). By “training” here, she mainly refers to the
training in behavioral science, incentive issues and firm behavior.
25
to move forward; we see economists needing not only changes in mindset, but also in how they
are educated. That training would be more differentiated than it currently is.9
There would be differentiated scientific and engineering training, just as there is in most
fields. Graduate programs would not be ranked on a unidimensional scale. Some top programs
would specialize in science and some in engineering and general contracting. Most economists
going on into undergraduate teaching would benefit most from general contracting training—
seeing how good applied policy requires approaching a policy problem from multiple directions
and the need to bring various skills to the table.
Those focusing on engineering and general contracting roles of economists would
provide more training in engineering heuristics and general contracting and less in abstract
theory. While the actual craft of plumbing might not be taught, the applied economist would be
introduced to it and taught its importance, just as they would be introduced to ethics, aesthetics,
politics, psychology, etc., and taught their importance. That training would be significantly
different than economist’s current training, and it goes far beyond teaching that plumbing is
9 There have been many calls for change in the curriculum but ours is somewhat different from
many of them such as the recent INET Core initiative. (https://www.core-econ.org/ See also
Bowles and Carlin, forthcoming). Their call for change concerns the coverage and presentation.
Ours focuses more on methodology, arguing that methods appropriate for science and methods
appropriate for policy are fundamentally different. In our view, identifying and highlighting this
difference in Econ 101 is of much more significance for economics education reform than
broadening the coverage of topics and schools of thought.
26
important. Such a change in training can only occur if economics distinguishes separate
boundaries for science and applied policy.
J. M. Keynes’s description of a master economists captures what we believe the training
should be designed to achieve:10
[T]he master-economist must possess a rare combination of gifts. [...] He must be
mathematician, historian, statesman, philosopher—in some degree. He must understand
symbols and speak in words. He must contemplate the particular in terms of the general,
and touch abstract and concrete in the same flight of thought. He must study the present
in the light of the past for the purposes of the future. No part of man's nature or his
institutions must lie entirely outside his regard. He must be purposeful and disinterested
in a simultaneous mood; as aloof and incorruptible as an artist, yet sometimes as near
the earth as a politician. (Keynes 1924, p. 322, emphasis original)
If economist’s training could be structured to let students know that a master economist is an all-
rounder, needing many different skills, that would be wonderful.
10 Hayek makes a similar point. He writes “nobody can be a great economist who is only an
economist—and I am even tempted to add that the economist who is only an economist is likely
to become a nuisance if not a positive danger.” (Hayek 1967, p. 123)
27
REFERENCES
Antweiler, Werner. 2016. “The Case for All-Inclusive Prices.” Retrieved from:
https://wernerantweiler.ca/blog.php?item=2016-09-18
Backhouse, Roger and Béatrice Cherrier. 2017. “The Age of the Applied Economist.” History of
Political Economy 49 (Supplement): 1–33.
Backhouse, Roger and Jeff Biddle. 2000. “The Concept of Applied Economics: A History of
Ambiguity and Multiple Meanings.” In Roger Backhouse and Jeff Biddle, eds.,
Toward a History of Applied Economics, History of Political Economy 32
(Supplement): 1-24.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. 2009. “The Experimental Approach to Developmental
Economics”, The Annual Reviews of Economics, 1 (1): 151-78.
__________. 2017. “An Introduction to the Handbook of Field Experiments”, in Banerjee and
Duflo (eds.), Handbook of Field Experiments, Vol. 1, pp. 1-24. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Blaug, Mark. 1997. Economic Theory in Retrospect. 5th edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bowles, Samuel. 2016. The Moral Economy: Why Good Incentives Are No Substitute for Good
Citizens. Yale University Press.
Bowles, Samuel and Wendy Carlin. Forthcoming. “What Students Learn in Economics 101:
Time for a Change.” Journal of Economic Literature.
28
Cartwright, Nancy and Jeremy Hardie. 2012. Evidence-Based Policy: A Practical Guide to
Doing it Better. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cherrier, Béatrice. 2017. “Classifying Economics: A History of the JEL Codes.” Journal of
Economic Literature 55(2): 545–579.
Chetty, Raj. 2013. “Yes, Economics Is a Science”, October 20, 2013, The New York Times,
retrieved from: https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/21/opinion/yes-economics-is-a-
science.html
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
Evidence.” American Economic Review 99 (4): 1145-1177.
Colander, David. 2009. “What Was ‘It’ that Robbins was Defining?” Journal of the History of
Economic Thought 31 (4): 437-448.
__________. 2011. “Applied Policy, Welfare Economics, and Mill’s Half-Truths.” In John Davis
and Wade Hands, eds., The Elgar Companion to Recent Economic Methodology, pp.
173-87. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. Also in Colander and H. Su. 2018.
How Economics Should Be Done: Essays on the Art and Craft of Economics. Edward
Elgar, pp. 65-79.
__________. 2013a. “Creating Humble Economists: A Code of Ethics for Economists.” In
George DeMartino and Dierdre McCloskey, eds., Handbook on Professional
Economic Ethics. Cambridge University Press. Also in Colander and H. Su. 2018.
How Economics Should Be Done: Essays on the Art and Craft of Economics. Edward
Elgar, pp. 240-252.
29
__________. 2013b. “Searching for Keys under a Streetlight: Why Journalists Shouldn’t Turn to
Nobel Prize Winners for Expertise in Policy.” Paper presented to ASSA Annual
Meeting San Diego, CA, January 04, 2013.
__________. 2018. “The Scope and Method of Applied Policy Economics.” The American
Economist 63 (2): 132–146.
Colander, David. and Craig Freedman. 2018. Where Economics Went Wrong: Chicago's
Abandonment of Classical Liberalism. Princeton University Press.
Duflo, E. 2017. “The Economist as Plumber”, American Economic Review: Papers &
Proceedings, 107 (5): 1-26.
Hayek, Friedrich. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” American Economic Review 35
(43): 519-530.
__________. 1967. Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1924. “Alfred Marshall, 1842-1924.” The Economic Journal 34 (135):
311-372.
__________. 1930. “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren.” In J. M. Keynes 1931.
Essays in Persuasion. London: Macmillan.
Keynes, John Neville. [1890] 1917. The Scope and Method of Political Economy. 4th edition.
London: Macmillan.
30
Koen, Billy Vaughn. 2003. Discussion of the Method: Conducting the Engineer’s Approach to
Problem Solving. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Leuz, Christian. 2018. “Evidence-Based Policymaking: Promise, Challenges and Opportunities
for Accounting and Financial Markets Research”, Accounting and Business Research,
48 (5): 582-608.
Mankiw, Gregory. 2006. “The Macroeconomists as Scientist and Engineer.” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 20 (4): 29-46.
Mill, John Stuart. [1844] 1967. “On the Definition of Political Economy; and on the Method of
Investigation Proper to It.” In J. M. Robson, ed., Collected Works of John Stuart Mill,
Vol. IV. Toronto: Toronto University Press, pp. 309-339.
Polak, Paul. 2008. Out of Poverty: What Works When Traditional Approaches Fail, San
Francisco: Barrett-Koehller Publishers.
Robbins, Lionel. [1932] 1935. Essay on the Nature and Significance of Economic Science. 2nd
edition. London: Macmillan.
__________. 1981. “Economics and Political Economy.” American Economic Review 71 (2): 1-
10.
Romer, Paul. 2016. “Why It Makes Sense for an M.D. to Lead the World Bank.” Retrieved from:
https://paulromer.net/md-to-lead-worldbank/
Roth, Alvin. 2002. “The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentations, and
Computation as Tools for Design Economics.” Econometrica 70 (4): 1341-1378.
31
Senior, Nassau. [1836] 1951. An Outline of the Science of Political Economy. New York, NY:
Augustus M. Kelly.
32